So let's dive in and let's build our very first simple Ionic app or get something onto the screen.
For this, you can visit ionicframework.com and there under developers installation, you find
installation instructions.
Now first important thing, you don't need an Ionic account,
you can instead simply install that Ionic CLI here. Now for that to be installable and to run,
you also need another tool which is NodeJS,
you can get NodeJS from nodejs.org. NodeJS is a Javascript runtime that you for example and mainly
used to build server-side applications with Javascript, that is not what we'll do in this course. We'll
still need NodeJS for two reasons,
reason number one is its package manager, NPM for Node Package Manager which is used to manage dependencies,
like other third-party libraries in Node apps but which also is the defacto standard package manager for
web projects in general,
so also for front-end web applications as we're building it here in the course in the end.
And therefore, we will use NPM to manage our dependencies and Ionic is just such a dependency
you could say.
Now in addition to NPM, we also need NodeJS itself because the Ionic build workflow and the tools, the
Ionic CLI behind the scenes run based on NodeJS, they use NodeJS features to execute correctly.
We don't need to write the code for that but we need to have NodeJS installed for these tools to
work.
So from nodejs.org, download the latest version,
in my case 11.8 and only if that should fail, use the LTS version here.
So simply download it, walk through the installer,
it's the same on Windows and MacOS, it's a normal installer, you go through it and thereafter, you'll
have NodeJS and NPM installed automatically, then you can execute this command and you execute this
in your normal terminal or a command prompt.
Now on Windows, feel free to run this command prompt as administrator by right-clicking on the executable,
run as administrator, on MacOS and Linux, you very likely need to add sudo in front of this command
to get the right permissions to execute it. Well with that, you're probably prompted to enter your password
and this will now install the Ionic CLI and tool you could say globally on your Mac or PC.
Now why globally?
Because now we can use that Ionic CLI anywhere, in any part here in our terminal to create new Ionic
projects, to run them, to build an Ionic app and so on.
So now with that installed, we can use it to build a new app, to create a new app. For this in your terminal
or command prompt, navigate into the folder where you want to create your new project folder for this
Ionic project. Once you navigate it there, run Ionic start,
this basically generates a new project. It will now ask you a couple of questions like what should
be the name of the project and I'll name it ionic-angular-course but you can of course choose any name
you want. Next, you can choose from a couple of templates.
Now the list here could change over time,
you essentially have the choice between a blank template which is totally empty project with just a
starting page, the side menu template where you have a side menu you can slide in from the left and a
tabs menu where you have some tabs at the bottom.
Now we'll learn about all these different navigation options throughout the course and you will learn how to
not just use them from a finished template but how to build them on your own
and therefore I will just start with blank here, which is the most boring but also the most simplest
template to start with
and as I said, we'll learn about the rest later.
Now this will generate a new project and install all the dependencies like Angular or Ionic,
this project requires. Let's wait for this to finish and I'll be back once it is.
Now once this finished, I'm asked if I want to use Ionic AppFlow and connect my app and you can simply
answer no here,
this is one of these cloud services which would be usable for free even,
you can create a free account and use some services but I don't need any of them right now, so I'll just
type in n and hit enter here.
Now next, you can navigate you see the commands here actually, you can navigate into this newly created
ionic-angular-course or whatever you name that folder and in there, simply run Ionic serve.
Now Ionic serve will behind the scenes as you can see here actually, use the Angular CLI which is
installed for you in this project to spin up a development server which in the end runs your application,
builds your Angular application and that's really cool. Ionic uses the Angular CLI behind the scenes,
so all the cool features offered by the Angular CLI are included in an Ionic project as well and
you don't need to wait for the Ionic CLI to update to include something you might want to use from
the Angular CLI
and if that's something you're totally not interested in, well then it doesn't hurt you that it uses
the Angular CLI.
So here, I then got my first Ionic app and this doesn't look too fancy yet but it already doesn't look
bad either,
this especially looks good if you open your Chrome developer tools or whichever browser you're using
but in Chrome, in the developer tools, you can click this toggle device thing here and you can then preview
the app as it would look on different mobile devices,
just reload after you select a new one. And this doesn't look too shabby,
looks already quite a bit like a mobile app even though there isn't too much meat in it but let's change
that. Now to change that,
we need an editor, we need an IDE where we can write our code. In this
course, I will use Visual Studio Code which is a free IDE built for web development.
It's fast, it's awesome,
it constantly gets new features,
it's really great.
You can get it from code.visualstudio.com and there, you can download it for your platform,
it's a simple installer, you download it, walk through the installer and once you have it installed, you can
open the project, the folder you generated here,
so in my case ionic-angular-course with Visual Studio Code. Here
I did open that ionic-angular-course folder, now inside of Visual Studio Code, it should look
like this for you as well, if it doesn't,
you can hit command shift P or a control shift p on Windows and if you enter theme here, you should be
able to pick your color theme here by pressing enter and I'm using the dark plus theme.
So in case you want to have that same look, you can use the dark plus theme here.
I'm also using some extensions, so if you go to view extensions here, I recommend that you use both the
Angular essentials, you can simply search for that here and then install this Angular essentials package,
this Angular essentials package here.
I already got it installed, simply install it on your own,
this helps you with general Angular development and what I also do in this or what I also use in this
course,
I also use the material icon theme and this is totally optional,
it's this one here,
it just changes the file icons you see inside of Visual Studio Code and I like that look here
so I installed that theme as well.
That doesn't help you with development,
it just gives you prettier icons and if you want to have these same icons you can see here, you can install
this theme.
Now once you're done picking your extensions, you can go back to explorer
here in the view menu or use this shortcut as I just did.
So this gives you the look and feel you see here in this course and what you find in there, in its core
is a normal Angular app,
so if you work with Angular before which you should for this course, then this does look quite familiar
here.
You got a source folder with an app folder, with an app module, an app component and here in the app.component.html
file, we see the first interesting thing,
these are not normal HTML elements and they're also not normal Angular components.
In the end this here are these web components added by Ionic.
Now these are some web components we can see even more here in your home.page.html file. You get
an ion-header, toolbar, title, ion-content and then also a normal HTML element.
So it is quite normal to mix and match them but Ionic has a rich suite of built-in elements which in
case you want to get a sneak peak already, you can find in the official docs under developers UI components
on ionicframework.com
and there you see a list of all the web components it ships with
and that's quite a lot. And we can do cool things, like here,
we could add an ion-button which is one of the components it ships with and in this course, you will learn
about a lot, so you don't need to memorize this right now or get shocked
regarding how you should ever learn this, you will learn it throughout the course and there,
I could say change text and let's say I want to change this text up there,
so let's grab this text here, maybe move it into a paragraph and on that button here, we can now add
a click listener and execute onChangeText.
So we write normal Angular code here, that is what I want to show you,
this is a normal Angular code, a normal Angular click listener, just the element is not a normal Angular
or HTML element,
it is an Ionic web component. And then now that we added this click listener and I'm
targeting onChangeText, I can add an onChangeText method here to my home page component class which
is a normal Angular component as you can tell, it has the component decorator,
it has the template URL and the selector, so all things you know from Angular. And in there, I could
have a text property with default starting text let's say and when we trigger this function here, this
method, I set this text equal to changed and now all we have to do, again normal Angular logic, all
we have to do is we go to the home.page.html and there, we can now output this with string interpolation,
also a normal Angular feature and we can target text here and text is simply the property name I have
in here. Now with that, if I now save this thanks to Ionic serve still running and you should keep this
up and running, it will automatically watch your code for changes and reload your app in the browser,
so rebuild the app and then reload the app in the browser whenever such a change happens.
And therefore now if you go to the tab where your app runs, you see the change template,
you see this button which looks like this without me adding any CSS which is another part of these
built-in web components,
they have the nice styling included
and if I press this button, it changes. Now by the way,
if I would switch to let's say a Pixel 2, so to an Android device and I reload,
you can also see that the button now looks differently
and if I tap it, we get this ripple effect here.
So that is a lot of the stuff Ionic does for you. It automatically adjusts its components to the platform
they're running on, it gives you nice styling and you can use them like normal web elements, like normal
HTML elements, just with a lot of functionality already included. Now
that is essentially what you will be able to do with Ionic.
We haven't even seen the part yet where we take this web app and run it on a real native device,
we'll do this later in the course
but this is in the end how we will work with Ionic throughout the course. We'll use the many elements it
offers us,
write
normal Angular logic and we can build nice beautiful automatically adjusting web apps that we can deploy
as web apps and run as normal websites but which we can then later also deploy as real native apps
which look and feel like native apps because well, they are native apps then by the end of the course.
And I hope this whets your appetite here, obviously we'll learn all about the different components here,
which ones exist, how we use them, how we configure them and how we combine them with Angular. We'll learn
all about this throughout the course.